National Institute of Health Islamabad logo World Health Organization Pakistan logo

# Weekly Epidemiological Bulletin

## Disease early warning system and response in Pakistan

Volume 4, Issue 3, Wednesday 23 January 2013

# Highlights

### Epidemiological week no. 3 (13 to 19 Jan 2013)

* **Measles:** 134 alerts investigated this week, responding to 22 outbreaks involving 661 measles cases and 26 deaths in 48 districts. Vitamin-A was provided to cases and district health teams took action to improve vaccination in affected areas.

* **81 districts and 2435 health facilities** have reported to DEWS this week 3, compared with 80 districts with 2190 health facilities shared weekly data in week 2, 2013 to the Disease Early Warning System (DEWS).

* **839,157 patients' consultations** were reported in week 3, 2013 compared to 802,888 consultations reported in week 2, 2013.

* Altogether **168 alerts** were investigated and response were provided to **28 outbreaks**.

Figure-1: 81 districts reported to DEWS in week 3, 2013

Map of Pakistan showing DEWS reported districts in week 3, 2013

### Priority diseases under surveillance in DEWS
Pneumonia
Acute Watery Diarrhoea
Bloody diarrhoea
Other Acute Diarrhoea
Suspected Enteric/Typhoid Fever
Suspected Malaria
Suspected Meningitis
Suspected Dengue fever
Suspected Viral Hemorrhagic Fever
Suspected Measles
Suspected Diphtheria
Suspected Pertussis
Suspected Acute Viral Hepatitis
Neonatal Tetanus
Acute Flaccid Paralysis
Scabies
Cutaneous Leishmaniasis

Cumulative number of selected health events reported in Epi-week 1 to 3, 2013 (29 Dec 2012 to 19 Jan 2013)

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
        <th>Disease</th>
        <th># of Cases</th>
        <th>Percentage</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
        <td>Acute diarrhoea</td>
<td>146,711</td>
<td>6%</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Bloody diarrhoea</td>
<td>7,147</td>
<td>0.5%</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>ARI</td>
<td>689,149</td>
<td>29%</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>S. Malaria</td>
<td>108,847</td>
<td>5%</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Skin Diseases</td>
<td>91,477</td>
<td>4%</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Unexplained fever</td>
<td>78,053</td>
<td>3%</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Total (All consultations)</td>
<td>2,376,286</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

Figure-2: Weekly trend of Acute Respiratory Infection (ARI) in Pakistan; Week-1, 2011 to week-3, 2013.

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
        <th>Week</th>
        <th>2011 (%)</th>
        <th>2012 (%)</th>
        <th>2013 (%)</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
        <td>1</td>
<td>33</td>
<td>28</td>
<td>30</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>2</td>
<td>32</td>
<td>27</td>
<td>29</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>3</td>
<td>31</td>
<td>26</td>
<td>29</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>4</td>
<td>31</td>
<td>26</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>5</td>
<td>31</td>
<td>25</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>6</td>
<td>30</td>
<td>24</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>7</td>
<td>30</td>
<td>23</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>8</td>
<td>29</td>
<td>23</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>9</td>
<td>28</td>
<td>22</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>10</td>
<td>27</td>
<td>21</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>11</td>
<td>26</td>
<td>20</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>12</td>
<td>25</td>
<td>19</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>13</td>
<td>24</td>
<td>18</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>14</td>
<td>23</td>
<td>18</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>15</td>
<td>22</td>
<td>17</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>16</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>17</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>17</td>
<td>20</td>
<td>16</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>18</td>
<td>19</td>
<td>16</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>19</td>
<td>18</td>
<td>15</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>20</td>
<td>18</td>
<td>15</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>21</td>
<td>17</td>
<td>15</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>22</td>
<td>17</td>
<td>14</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>23</td>
<td>17</td>
<td>14</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>24</td>
<td>17</td>
<td>14</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>25</td>
<td>17</td>
<td>14</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>26</td>
<td>17</td>
<td>14</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>27</td>
<td>17</td>
<td>14</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>28</td>
<td>17</td>
<td>14</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>29</td>
<td>18</td>
<td>14</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>30</td>
<td>18</td>
<td>14</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>31</td>
<td>18</td>
<td>14</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>32</td>
<td>18</td>
<td>15</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>33</td>
<td>18</td>
<td>15</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>34</td>
<td>18</td>
<td>16</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>35</td>
<td>18</td>
<td>16</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>36</td>
<td>19</td>
<td>17</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>37</td>
<td>20</td>
<td>18</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>38</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>19</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>39</td>
<td>22</td>
<td>20</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>40</td>
<td>23</td>
<td>21</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>41</td>
<td>23</td>
<td>22</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>42</td>
<td>24</td>
<td>23</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>43</td>
<td>24</td>
<td>24</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>44</td>
<td>25</td>
<td>25</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>45</td>
<td>25</td>
<td>26</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>46</td>
<td>26</td>
<td>27</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>47</td>
<td>26</td>
<td>28</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>48</td>
<td>27</td>
<td>28</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>49</td>
<td>28</td>
<td>29</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>50</td>
<td>29</td>
<td>30</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>51</td>
<td>30</td>
<td>31</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

Major health events reported during the Epi-week - 3 (13 - 19 Jan 2013)

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
        <th>Disease</th>
        <th># of Cases</th>
        <th>Percentage</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
        <td>Acute diarrhoea</td>
<td>50,507</td>
<td>6%</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Bloody diarrhoea</td>
<td>2,453</td>
<td>&lt;0.5%</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>ARI</td>
<td>240,764</td>
<td>29%</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>S. Malaria</td>
<td>37,126</td>
<td>4%</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Skin Diseases</td>
<td>31,542</td>
<td>4%</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Unexplained fever</td>
<td>27,492</td>
<td>3%</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Total (All consultations)</td>
<td>839,157</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

* The graph (Figure-2) shows the comparison of weekly trend of Acute respiratory infection (ARI) as proportional morbidity (percentage of cases out of total consultations) reported to DEWS each week in year 2011; 2012 and 2013.

This weekly Epidemiological Bulletin is published jointly by the National Institute of Health, Islamabad and World Health Organization (WHO), Pakistan. For Correspondence: NIH: eic.nih@gmail.com; WHO: Tel : +92-051-9255184-5, Fax : +92-051-9255083; E-mail: wr@pak.emro.who.int.

01


---



Weekly Bulletin: DEWS, Pakistan, Week no. 3 (13 to 19 Jan 2013)

**Current week's (3/2013) Outbreaks:**

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
        <th>Date</th>
        <th>Disease</th>
        <th>Province</th>
        <th>District</th>
        <th>Area</th>
        <th>&lt;5M</th>
        <th>&gt;5M</th>
        <th>&lt;5F</th>
        <th>&gt;5F</th>
        <th>Action Taken</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
        <td>15-Jan</td>
<td>Leishmaniasis</td>
<td>Balochistan</td>
<td>Killa Saifullah</td>
<td>Muslim Bagh, town area, Tehsil Muslim Bagh</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>Alert for Cutaneous Leishmaniasis, 15 cases were reported and investigated. Health session conducted and treatment as per WHO protocol was given at Leishmaniasis centre established at THQ hospital.</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>18-Jan</td>
<td>Leishmaniasis</td>
<td>Balochistan</td>
<td>Lasbela</td>
<td>Winder, UC Winder, Tehsil Sonmiani</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>Alert for 7 cases of Cutaneous Leishmaniasis reported. All the cases observe no travel history. No more cases found during active search. Treatment was provided up to WHO protocol. Information shared with DHO.</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>15-Jan</td>
<td>Malaria</td>
<td>Balochistan</td>
<td>Harnai</td>
<td>Ghurmai, UC Harnai urban, Tehsil Harnai</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>Alert for suspected Malaria was received. Slide positivity rate was 54.5%. Total 11 slides were tested and 6 were positive. Out of those 1 PF and 5 PV positive. Cases were from the same location. Merlin (INGO) is functional in the district and support malarial activities. Medicine were already available there with investigation facilities. Matter was discussed with the Merlin focal person and DHO, district Harnai. Patients are under treatment.</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>15-Jan</td>
<td>Malaria</td>
<td>Balochistan</td>
<td>Harnai</td>
<td>Zardaloo, UC Khost, Tehsil Shahrig</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>Alert for suspected Malaria received. 18 slides tested, out of which 9 verified positive with 50% of SPR. Out of those 3 PF, 4 PV and 2 MP positive. Investigation was completed. Cases were from one location. Medicines were already available in nearest HF. Merlin is functional in the district and support malarial activity. DHO and Merlin Focal person was informed.</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>17-Jan</td>
<td>Measles</td>
<td>Balochistan</td>
<td>Nasirabad</td>
<td>Ghot Mir Hazoor Bakhsh Jatak</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>Alert for Measles 5 cases were reported including one death. Cases were provided treatment as per scenario along with vit-A. Neighboring 5 Goths were searched for more cases but not found any. DHO was coordinated and mop-up activity is going on.</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>19-Jan</td>
<td>Measles</td>
<td>Balochistan</td>
<td>Nasirabad</td>
<td>Ghot Abdul Wahid Lango, UC Manjhoti-1</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>Alert for Measles received by DSV. Area was visited and found 7 cases along with one death. Patients were presented with complication of Measles. Vit A given to all the patients. Information shared with EPI and DHO. Mop-up activity is continue.</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>19-Jan</td>
<td>Measles</td>
<td>Balochistan</td>
<td>Nasirabad</td>
<td>Ghot Sona Khan Bugti, UC Manjhoti-2</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>Alert for Measles reported by community. Investigation was done on time and appropriate response given. 9 cases were reported with 3 deaths. None of the case was routinely immunized. Vit A given to patients. 2nd dose given to parents to be given on second day. EPI Coordinator and DHO informed and mop-up activity has started.</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>17-Jan</td>
<td>Measles</td>
<td>FATA</td>
<td>Mohmand Agency</td>
<td>Village Babi Khel, Halimzai, Tehsil Ghalanai, Mohmand Agency</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>Alert for Measles, WHO DEWS team responded to the alert and visited AHQ. After a meeting with CMO AHQ, a response team comprising of DEWS team and an EPI team from AHQ went for the response. 9 more suspected Measles cases were identified on active surveillance in the area. The team also enquired about the death but no clue relating the death from Measles could be found. Two blood samples were collected. Vitamin A drops were provided to all the cases and WHO team also provided medicine to the patients for symptomatic treatment. Agency Surgeon and FSMO informed about the outbreak. Mass measles vaccination done in which 300 children were vaccinated.</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>17-Jan</td>
<td>Diphtheria</td>
<td>ICT</td>
<td>Islamabad</td>
<td>PIMS ( G 11/2)</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>DD PIMS reported 1 Diphtheria case, confirmed by NIH. Health education with preventive measures was conducted to contacts and were advised prophylactic antibiotics, 2 samples collected were from contacts.</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>14-Jan</td>
<td>Leishmaniasis</td>
<td>Khyber Pakhtunkhwa</td>
<td>Mardan</td>
<td>Village Kandao, Sorai khowa, UC Kharki, Tehsil Takht Bhai</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>Alert for Cutaneous Leishmaniasis was reported from UC Baizo Kharki. During active surveillance 17 more clinical cases were identified in the area and surrounding. Required doses of Inj Glucantime were placed in nearby health facility for all registered cases. FPHC Mardan, Relief Int, PPHI were requested for vector control interventions in the areas and surrounding. On job training of health staff was conducted for Intralesional administration of Inj Glucantime. RBM focal person was informed and requested for vector control measures in the areas. EDO Health and focal person was informed.</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>16-Jan</td>
<td>Measles</td>
<td>Khyber Pakhtunkhwa</td>
<td>Haripur</td>
<td>Village Sikandarpur</td>
<td>13</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>18</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>Alert for suspected Measles case was reported from village Sikandarpur, gave vitamin A. Field investigation found 8/26 children unvaccinated for measles 2 vaccine and 4 children missing for measles 1 vaccine. On active case finding no more cases were identified with active measles. Missed children sent to nearest health facility for vaccination. EDO Health was informed about the cases</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>14-Jan</td>
<td>Measles</td>
<td>Punjab</td>
<td>D. G. Khan</td>
<td>Alishah wala uc Chorratta</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>Alert for suspected Measles case reported and four other cases found during active surveillance, RRT and SO DEWS examined the children who have history of fever rash (maculopapular ) cough and Coryza. Serum specimen of two children sent to NIH for detection of measles specific Ig M. Children given vitamin A doses . 10 out of 12 children of 9 month to 12 year of age have three doses of Penta with BCG scars whereas measles vaccination is zero in all the children examined. There is reported one death in the house of index case after remaining ill for one week with fever, cough, coryza, conjunctivitis and rash. Out reach Measles vaccination is not done in their area according to parents. Advised importance of isolation of the cases from healthy children to halt the spread of disease. Provided awareness through health session for highlighting importance of vaccination of their children against all the EPI diseases. Measles vaccination is planned by DSV of the district on the advise of EDO .</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>15-Jan</td>
<td>Measles</td>
<td>Punjab</td>
<td>D. G. Khan</td>
<td>Sayar wala uc Paigan</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>Alert for suspected measles case reported from DHQ and on active surveillance five new cases and one death due to suspected measles detected. Blood serum specimen of two children sent to NIH for detection of measles specific Ig M. Children given vitamin A doses . 16 children of 9 month to 12 year of age checked in the locality 14 have routine vaccination doses of Penta but only 3 have measles vaccination one dose in all the children examined. There is reported one death in the neighboring house of index case after remaining ill for one week with fever, cough Coryza, conjunctivitis and rash. Advised importance of isolation of the cases from healthy children to halt the spread of disease. Health session conducted for highlighting importance of vaccination of the children against all the EPI diseases. Measles vaccination is planned by the DSV.</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>13-Jan</td>
<td>Measles</td>
<td>Punjab</td>
<td>Lahore</td>
<td>Allama Iqbal Town</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>Alert for Measles, 6 cases were reported from Children Hospital, Jinnah Hospital and Sheikh Zayed Hospital Teaching units. The suspects has been given 1st dose of vitamin A at these hospitals while vaccinator and LHS were advised to deliver 2nd dose on 2nd day. During active surveillance 3 more cases were found. EPI center Established in the Government Hospital Shah Pur and Niaz Baig nearest Health Facility supervised by DDOH, LHW and vaccinator completed the List of children for Mass Measles campaign. Religious and community leaders were motivated for EPI coverage up to 100%. 100 children were checked for routine EPI coverage where 20 children were found to have missed second doze of Measles. Vaccinator was requested to ensure 100% EPI vaccination in the area along with Measles. Blood sample of the suspected case was drawn and throat swab was taken and sent to NIH for Measles detection. Health education to mothers in the community was conducted with the help of LHW. Focal Person EPI at DG Health and EDO (H) was informed, Measles surveillance cell is established at EDO office and daily report generation is started along with DEWS team Lahore. The area would be visited on daily basis by response Team</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

This weekly Epidemiological Bulletin is published jointly by the National Institute of Health, Islamabad and World Health Organization (WHO), Pakistan.
For Correspondence: NIH: eic.nih@gmail.com; WHO: Tel : +92-051-9255184-5, Fax : +92-051-9255083; E-mail: wr@pak.emro.who.int.
02


---



Weekly Bulletin: DEWS, Pakistan, Week no. 3 (13 to 19 Jan 2013)

**Cont’d current week's (3/2013) Outbreaks:**

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
        <th>Date</th>
        <th>Disease</th>
        <th>Province</th>
        <th>District</th>
        <th>Area</th>
        <th>&lt;5M</th>
        <th>&gt;5M</th>
        <th>&lt;5F</th>
        <th>&gt;5F</th>
        <th>Action Taken</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
        <td>13-Jan</td>
<td>Measles</td>
<td>Punjab</td>
<td>Lahore</td>
<td>Ravi Town</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>Alert for 10 Measles cases were reported from Mayo, Children, Yaki Gate Hospitals. The suspects has been given 1st dose of vitamin A at hospitals while vaccinator and LHS were advised to deliver 2nd dose on 2nd day. During active surveillance 3 more cases were found. EPI center established in the Government Hospital Shah dara Hospital nearest Health Facility supervised by DDOH,LHW and Vaccinator completed the List of Children for Mass Measles campaign. Religious and community leaders were motivated for EPI Coverage up to 100%. 40 children were checked for routine EPI coverage where 9 children were found to have missed second doze of Measles. Vaccinator was requested to ensure 100% EPI vaccination in the area along with Measles. Blood sample of the suspected case was drawn and throat swabs were taken and send to NIH for Measles specific IgM detection. Health education to mothers in community was conducted with the help of LHW. Focal person EPI at DG Health and EDO (H) was informed, Measles surveillance cell is established at EDO office and daily report generation is started along with DEWS team Lahore. The area would be visited on daily basis by response team.</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>14-Jan</td>
<td>Measles</td>
<td>Punjab</td>
<td>Lahore</td>
<td>Shalimar Town</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>Alert for 7 Measles cases were reported from Mayo, Children, Yaki Gate, and Sir Ganga Ram Hospitals. The suspects has been given 1st dose of vitamin A at these hospitals while vaccinator and LHS were advised to deliver 2nd dose on 2nd day. Active surveillance done and 2 more cases were found. Blood sample of the suspected case was drawn and throat swab was taken and sent to NIH for Measles specific IgM detection. Health education to mothers in community was conducted with the help of LHW. Focal Person EPI at DG Health and EDO (H) was informed, Measles surveillance cell is established at EDO office and daily report generation is started along with DEWS team Lahore. The area would be visited on daily basis by response Team</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>14-Jan</td>
<td>Measles</td>
<td>Punjab</td>
<td>Lahore</td>
<td>Nishter Town</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>Alert for 6 Measles cases were reported from Children hospital Lahore, given 1st dose of vitamin A at Mayo hospital while vaccinator and LHS were advised to deliver 2nd dose on 2n day. During active surveillance 1 more case was found. Focal Person EPI at DG Health and EDO (H) was informed, Measles surveillance cell is established at EDO office and Daily report generation is started along with DEWS team Lahore. The area would be visited on daily basis by response team.</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>15-Jan</td>
<td>Measles</td>
<td>Punjab</td>
<td>Lahore</td>
<td>Aziz Bhatti Town</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>Alert for 5 suspected Measles cases reported from different localities of Aziz Bhatti Town. The suspects has been given 1st dose of vitamin A at Children hospital, Ghurki Hospital and Sir Ganga Ram Hospital while vaccinator and LHS were advised to deliver 2nd dose on 2nd day. During active surveillance 1 case was found. 20 children were checked for routine EPI coverage where 7 children were found to have missed second doze of Measles. Vaccinator was requested to ensure 100% EPI vaccination in the area. Blood sample of the suspected case was drawn and send to NIH for Measles specific IgM detection. Health education to mothers in community was conducted with the help of LHS.</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>15-Jan</td>
<td>Measles</td>
<td>Punjab</td>
<td>Lahore</td>
<td>Cantonment Town</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>Alert for 4 suspected Measles cases reported from different localities of Cantonment town. The suspects has been given 1st dose of vitamin A at Children hospital and Lahore General Hospital while vaccinator and LHS were advised to deliver 2nd dose on 2nd day. During active surveillance 3 more cases were found. 20 children were checked for routine EPI coverage where 6 children were found to have missed second doze of Measles. Vaccinator was requested to ensure 100% EPI vaccination in the area along with Measles. Blood sample of the suspected case was drawn and throat swabs were taken and send to NIH for Measles specific IgM detection. Health education to mothers in community was conducted with the help of LHS.</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>16-Jan</td>
<td>Measles</td>
<td>Punjab</td>
<td>Lahore</td>
<td>Data Ganj Baksh Town</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>Alert for 4 suspected Measles cases reported from Data Ganj Bakhsh Town. The suspects has been given 1st dose of vitamin A at Children hospital, Mayo and Sir Ganga Ran Hospital while vaccinator and LHS were requested to deliver 2nd dose on 2nd day. During active surveillance 3 more cases were found. 22 children were checked for routine EPI coverage where 8 children were found to have missed second doze of Measles. Vaccinator was requested to ensure 100% EPI vaccination in the area along with Measles. Blood sample of the suspected case was drawn and throat swab was taken and send to NIH for Measles specific IgM detection. Health education to mothers in community was conducted with the help of LHS.</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>17-Jan</td>
<td>Measles</td>
<td>Punjab</td>
<td>Lahore</td>
<td>Gulberg Town</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>Alert for 5 suspected cases of Measles were reported from Goldberg Town. The suspects has been given 1st dose of vitamin A at Children hospital, Ittefaq and Lahore general Hospital while vaccinator and LHS were requested to give 2nd dose on 2nd day. During active surveillance 2 more cases were found. 30 children were checked for routine EPI coverage where 12 children were found to have missed second doze of Measles. Vaccinator was requested to ensure 100% EPI vaccination in the areaalong with Measles. Blood sample of the suspected case was drawn and throat swab was taken and send to NIH for Measles specific IgM detection. Health education to mothers in community was conducted with the help of LHS.</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>18-Jan</td>
<td>Measles</td>
<td>Punjab</td>
<td>Lahore</td>
<td>Wahga Town</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>Alert for 3 suspected Measles cases reported from Wahga Town. Given 1st dose of vitamin A and LHS were requested to give 2nd dose on 2nd day. 24 children were checked for routine EPI coverage where 8 children were found to have missed second doze of Measles. Vaccinator was requested to ensure 100% EPI vaccination in the area along with Measles. Blood sample of the suspected case was drawn send to NIH for Measles specific IgM detection. Health education to mothers in community was conducted with the help of LHS.</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>14-Jan</td>
<td>Measles</td>
<td>Punjab</td>
<td>Muzaffargarh</td>
<td>Basti Beema, Moza Noor Kubra, UC Bhutta Pur, Muzaffargarh</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>Alert for suspected Measles case was given 1st dose of vitamin-A while 2nd was handed over to mother for administration on next day. Neighboring 10 house holds were visited where 8 more similar cases were found and referred to BHU Bhutta Pur/DHQ. During active surveillance, among 15 children of age 9 months – 5 years, 11 were having BCG scar &amp; 5 had received single dose of Measles vaccine. While, among 13 children among age group 5-15 years, 9 had BCG scar &amp; parents also couldn't clearly remind administration of Measles vaccine. Vaccinator was advised by DOH to ensure 100% coverage of all due defaulters &amp; to administer Measles vaccine to all children of age 7 months to 15 years in the area within this week. Blood sample of the suspected case was collected and send to NIH.</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>14-Jan</td>
<td>Measles</td>
<td>Punjab</td>
<td>Rahim Yar Khan</td>
<td>Basti Rasool Bux, Taranda Mohd Panah, Tehsil Liaqatpur</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>Alert for suspected Measles case reported from RHC TM Panah. 5 cases were reported by RHC Taranda Muhammad Panah suffering from fever, cough, Coryza along with maculopapular rash. On active surveillance 4 more cases were identified from 2 nearby villages. Blood sample was collected and sent for confirmation. 1 dose of Vitamin A was given on the spot to all cases while 2nd dose was provided to the parents to be administered on next day. Concerned vaccinator had started a mass vaccination campaign in the area and 3 nearby locations had already been vaccinated. SO and DOH planned an immediate sweep vaccination activity in 11 UCs of tehsil Liaqatpur with EPI staff. A Health education session was conducted with community about prevention from measles. List of identified missed cases shared with vaccinator.</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>17-Jan</td>
<td>Measles</td>
<td>Punjab</td>
<td>Rahim Yar Khan</td>
<td>THQ Sadiqabad Sadiqabad City</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>Alert for 4 suspected Measles cases reported from THQ. A blood sample was collected and sent for confirmation. 1st dose of Vitamin A was given on the spot while 2nd dose was provided to the parents to be administered on next day. Health education session was conducted with community about prevention from measles. DOH in consultation with SO-DEWS planned and ordered a comprehensive sweep vaccination activity in 13 UCs of Sadiqabad Tehsil especially those UCs bordering Sindh province by providing additional resources to EPI teams.</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

This weekly Epidemiological Bulletin is published jointly by the National Institute of Health, Islamabad and World Health Organization (WHO), Pakistan.
For Correspondence: NIH: eic.nih@gmail.com; WHO: Tel : +92-051-9255184-5, Fax : +92-051-9255083; E-mail: wr@pak.emro.who.int.

03


---


Weekly Bulletin: DEWS, Pakistan, Week no. 3 (13 to 19 Jan 2013)

Figure-3: Number of alerts received and responded, week 1 - 3, 2013

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
        <th>Week</th>
        <th>Measles</th>
        <th>Leishmaniasis</th>
        <th>Typhoid</th>
        <th>Pertussis</th>
        <th>AWD</th>
        <th>Malaria</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
        <td>Wk-1</td>
<td>173</td>
<td>26</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Wk-2</td>
<td>163</td>
<td>17</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Wk-3</td>
<td>134</td>
<td>18</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>2</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

Figure-4: Number of consultations by age and gender, week 3, 2013

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
        <th>Age Group</th>
        <th>Male</th>
        <th>Female</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
        <td>&lt; 1 yr</td>
<td>30440</td>
<td>29684</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>1-4 yr</td>
<td>74928</td>
<td>68104</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>5-14 yr</td>
<td>90476</td>
<td>96960</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>15-50 yr</td>
<td>128133</td>
<td>199813</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>50 + yr</td>
<td>55433</td>
<td>65186</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

**Province Khyber Pakhtunkhwa:**

490 health facilities from 16 districts of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa sent reports to DEWS with a total of 132,291 patients consultations reported in week 3, 2013. Total 45 alerts were received and appropriate measures were taken. Altogether 37 alerts for Measles; 5 for Leishmaniasis; while 1 each for NNT, Pertussis and H1N1. ARI trend showing decreasing as compared with last week.

Figure-5: Trend of ARI, province Khyber Pakhtunkhwa

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
        <th>Week</th>
        <th>2011 (%)</th>
        <th>2012 (%)</th>
        <th>2013 (%)</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
        <td>1</td>
<td>45</td>
<td>32</td>
<td>33</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>3</td>
<td>40</td>
<td>33</td>
<td>32</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>5</td>
<td>42</td>
<td>30</td>
<td>31</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>7</td>
<td>40</td>
<td>29</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>9</td>
<td>38</td>
<td>28</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>11</td>
<td>35</td>
<td>26</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>13</td>
<td>31</td>
<td>24</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>15</td>
<td>31</td>
<td>22</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>17</td>
<td>28</td>
<td>21</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>19</td>
<td>27</td>
<td>20</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>21</td>
<td>25</td>
<td>20</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>23</td>
<td>23</td>
<td>19</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>25</td>
<td>25</td>
<td>18</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>27</td>
<td>24</td>
<td>18</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>29</td>
<td>22</td>
<td>17</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>31</td>
<td>22</td>
<td>15</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>33</td>
<td>22</td>
<td>15</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>35</td>
<td>22</td>
<td>15</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>37</td>
<td>23</td>
<td>15</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>39</td>
<td>25</td>
<td>18</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>41</td>
<td>28</td>
<td>23</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>43</td>
<td>28</td>
<td>23</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>45</td>
<td>31</td>
<td>25</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>47</td>
<td>34</td>
<td>27</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>49</td>
<td>37</td>
<td>30</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>51</td>
<td>37</td>
<td>30</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

Figure-6: Number of alerts received and responded wk 1 to wk 3, 2013

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
        <th>Week</th>
        <th>Measles</th>
        <th>Leishmaniasis</th>
        <th>AWD</th>
        <th>Pertussis</th>
        <th>Typhoid</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
        <td>Wk-1</td>
<td>15</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Wk-2</td>
<td>29</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>1</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Wk-3</td>
<td>37</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

**Province Sindh:**

955 health facilities from 23 districts in Sindh province reported to DEWS with a total of 412,171 patients consultations in week 3, 2013. Total 2 alerts for Measles were received and appropriate measures were taken. ARI trend showing stability as compared with last week.

Figure-7: Trend of trend of ARI, province Sindh

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
        <th>Week</th>
        <th>2011 (%)</th>
        <th>2012 (%)</th>
        <th>2013 (%)</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
        <td>1</td>
<td>30</td>
<td>23</td>
<td>31</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>3</td>
<td>31</td>
<td>26</td>
<td>31</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>5</td>
<td>29</td>
<td>25</td>
<td>30</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>7</td>
<td>28</td>
<td>24</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>9</td>
<td>24</td>
<td>24</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>11</td>
<td>23</td>
<td>22</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>13</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>21</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>15</td>
<td>20</td>
<td>19</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>17</td>
<td>19</td>
<td>18</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>19</td>
<td>18</td>
<td>17</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>21</td>
<td>17</td>
<td>16</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>23</td>
<td>17</td>
<td>16</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>25</td>
<td>18</td>
<td>16</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>27</td>
<td>19</td>
<td>16</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>29</td>
<td>19</td>
<td>16</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>31</td>
<td>18</td>
<td>16</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>33</td>
<td>18</td>
<td>17</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>35</td>
<td>18</td>
<td>17</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>37</td>
<td>19</td>
<td>18</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>39</td>
<td>20</td>
<td>19</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>41</td>
<td>23</td>
<td>21</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>43</td>
<td>25</td>
<td>24</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>45</td>
<td>26</td>
<td>25</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>47</td>
<td>28</td>
<td>27</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>49</td>
<td>29</td>
<td>29</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>51</td>
<td>30</td>
<td>30</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

Figure-8: Number of alerts received and responded wk 1 to wk 3, 2013

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
        <th>Week</th>
        <th>Measles</th>
        <th>Leishmaniasis</th>
        <th>AWD</th>
        <th>Pertussis</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
        <td>Wk-1</td>
<td>98</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Wk-2</td>
<td>13</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Wk-3</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

**Province Punjab:**

433 health facilities from 9 districts in province Punjab reported to DEWS with a total of 193,261 patients consultations in week 3, 2013. Total 46 alerts were received and appropriate measures were taken. Altogether 38 for Measles; 7 for Typhoid; and 1 for Leishmaniasis. ARI trend showing decrease as compared with last week.

Figure-9: Trend of ARI, province Punjab

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
        <th>Week</th>
        <th>2011 (%)</th>
        <th>2012 (%)</th>
        <th>2013 (%)</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
        <td>1</td>
<td>28</td>
<td>24</td>
<td>27</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>3</td>
<td>29</td>
<td>28</td>
<td>25</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>5</td>
<td>27</td>
<td>26</td>
<td>24</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>7</td>
<td>25</td>
<td>23</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>9</td>
<td>22</td>
<td>21</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>11</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>19</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>13</td>
<td>23</td>
<td>17</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>15</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>15</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>17</td>
<td>19</td>
<td>14</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>19</td>
<td>18</td>
<td>14</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>21</td>
<td>17</td>
<td>14</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>23</td>
<td>16</td>
<td>14</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>25</td>
<td>15</td>
<td>13</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>27</td>
<td>14</td>
<td>12</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>29</td>
<td>14</td>
<td>11</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>31</td>
<td>15</td>
<td>11</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>33</td>
<td>16</td>
<td>11</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>35</td>
<td>15</td>
<td>11</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>37</td>
<td>14</td>
<td>11</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>39</td>
<td>15</td>
<td>13</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>41</td>
<td>17</td>
<td>15</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>43</td>
<td>19</td>
<td>18</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>45</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>21</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>47</td>
<td>23</td>
<td>23</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>49</td>
<td>25</td>
<td>26</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>51</td>
<td>28</td>
<td>28</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

Figure-10: Number of alerts received and responded wk 1 to wk 3, 2013

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
        <th>Week</th>
        <th>Measles</th>
        <th>Typhoid</th>
        <th>Leishmaniasis</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
        <td>Wk-1</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Wk-2</td>
<td>41</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Wk-3</td>
<td>38</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>1</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

This weekly Epidemiological Bulletin is published jointly by the National Institute of Health, Islamabad and World Health Organization (WHO), Pakistan.
For Correspondence: NIH: eic.nih@gmail.com; WHO: Tel : +92-051-9255184-5, Fax : +92-051-9255083; E-mail: wr@pak.emro.who.int.

04


---



Weekly Bulletin: DEWS, Pakistan, Week no. 3 (13 to 19 Jan 2013)

## Province Balochistan:

401 health facilities from 20 districts in province Balochistan reported to DEWS with a total of 64,954 patients consultations in week 3, 2013. Total 56 alerts reported and appropriate measures were taken in week 3, 2013. Altogether 45 alerts were for Measles; 9 for Leishmaniasis; while 2 for Suspected Malaria. ARI trend showing stability as compared with last week.

## Figure-11: Trend of ARI, province Balochistan

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
        <th>Week</th>
        <th>2011</th>
        <th>2012</th>
        <th>2013</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
        <td>1</td>
<td>36</td>
<td>25</td>
<td>25</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>3</td>
<td>31</td>
<td>24</td>
<td>23</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>5</td>
<td>30</td>
<td>22</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>7</td>
<td>30</td>
<td>23</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>9</td>
<td>30</td>
<td>22</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>11</td>
<td>27</td>
<td>21</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>13</td>
<td>23</td>
<td>18</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>15</td>
<td>23</td>
<td>18</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>17</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>18</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>19</td>
<td>20</td>
<td>17</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>21</td>
<td>18</td>
<td>16</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>23</td>
<td>17</td>
<td>15</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>25</td>
<td>17</td>
<td>15</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>27</td>
<td>16</td>
<td>14</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>29</td>
<td>16</td>
<td>14</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>31</td>
<td>16</td>
<td>14</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>33</td>
<td>16</td>
<td>14</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>35</td>
<td>15</td>
<td>14</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>37</td>
<td>17</td>
<td>15</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>39</td>
<td>19</td>
<td>18</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>41</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>18</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>43</td>
<td>20</td>
<td>18</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>45</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>19</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>47</td>
<td>24</td>
<td>23</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>49</td>
<td>24</td>
<td>23</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>51</td>
<td>25</td>
<td>24</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

## Figure-12: Number of alerts received and responded wk 1 to wk 3, 2013

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
        <th>Week</th>
        <th>Measles</th>
        <th>Leishmaniasis</th>
        <th>Typhoid</th>
        <th>Malaria</th>
        <th>Pertussis</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
        <td>Wk-1</td>
<td>19</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Wk-2</td>
<td>66</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Wk-3</td>
<td>45</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

## Province Gilgit Baltistan:

28 health facilities from 5 districts in Gilgit Baltistan reported to DEWS with a total of 10,260 patients consultations in week 3, 2013. One Measles alert was reported in week 3, 2012. ARI showing a minor decrease as compared with last week.

## Figure-13: Trend of ARI, province Gilgit Baltistan

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
        <th>Week</th>
        <th>2011</th>
        <th>2012</th>
        <th>2013</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
        <td>1</td>
<td>28</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>21</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>3</td>
<td>37</td>
<td>24</td>
<td>24</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>5</td>
<td>28</td>
<td>22</td>
<td>23</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>7</td>
<td>29</td>
<td>22</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>9</td>
<td>16</td>
<td>14</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>11</td>
<td>13</td>
<td>12</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>13</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>10</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>15</td>
<td>41</td>
<td>14</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>17</td>
<td>34</td>
<td>11</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>19</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>11</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>21</td>
<td>26</td>
<td>11</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>23</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>8</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>25</td>
<td>13</td>
<td>8</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>27</td>
<td>12</td>
<td>11</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>29</td>
<td>12</td>
<td>11</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>31</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>10</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>33</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>10</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>35</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>10</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>37</td>
<td>15</td>
<td>8</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>39</td>
<td>18</td>
<td>12</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>41</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>11</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>43</td>
<td>23</td>
<td>13</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>45</td>
<td>25</td>
<td>19</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>47</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>13</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>49</td>
<td>35</td>
<td>27</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>51</td>
<td>33</td>
<td>22</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

## Figure-14: Number of alerts received and responded wk 1 to wk 3, 2013

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
        <th>Week</th>
        <th>Measles</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
        <td>Wk-1</td>
<td>4</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Wk-2</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Wk-3</td>
<td>1</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

## FATA:

54 health facilities from 3 agencies in FATA reported to DEWS with a total of 11,744 patients consultations in week 3, 2013. 9 alerts, 5 for Measles; while 2 each for NNT and Leishmaniasis were reported in week 3, 2012 and appropriate measures were taken. ARI showing minor increase as compared with last week.

## Figure-15: Trend of ARI, FATA

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
        <th>Week</th>
        <th>2011</th>
        <th>2012</th>
        <th>2013</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
        <td>1</td>
<td>28</td>
<td>25</td>
<td>25</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>3</td>
<td>27</td>
<td>25</td>
<td>27</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>5</td>
<td>33</td>
<td>31</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>7</td>
<td>32</td>
<td>38</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>9</td>
<td>26</td>
<td>31</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>11</td>
<td>25</td>
<td>25</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>13</td>
<td>27</td>
<td>20</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>15</td>
<td>20</td>
<td>18</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>17</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>16</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>19</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>14</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>21</td>
<td>19</td>
<td>13</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>23</td>
<td>18</td>
<td>12</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>25</td>
<td>15</td>
<td>11</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>27</td>
<td>18</td>
<td>12</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>29</td>
<td>15</td>
<td>12</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>31</td>
<td>18</td>
<td>13</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>33</td>
<td>13</td>
<td>15</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>35</td>
<td>18</td>
<td>12</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>37</td>
<td>18</td>
<td>10</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>39</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>11</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>41</td>
<td>24</td>
<td>16</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>43</td>
<td>26</td>
<td>15</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>45</td>
<td>25</td>
<td>19</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>47</td>
<td>25</td>
<td>21</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>49</td>
<td>28</td>
<td>22</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>51</td>
<td>30</td>
<td>24</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

## Figure-16: Number of alerts received and responded wk 1 to wk 3, 2013

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
        <th>Week</th>
        <th>Measles</th>
        <th>Leishmaniasis</th>
        <th>Typhoid</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
        <td>Wk-1</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Wk-2</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>2</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Wk-3</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

## State of Azad Jammu and Kashmir:

56 health facilities from 4 districts in AJ&K reported to DEWS with a total of 9,720 patients consultations in week 3, 2013. 7 alerts, 6 for Measles; while 1 for Leishmaniasis were received and appropriate measures were taken. ARI trend showing increase as compared with last week.

## Figure-17: Trend of ARI, AJ&K

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
        <th>Week</th>
        <th>2011</th>
        <th>2012</th>
        <th>2013</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
        <td>1</td>
<td>25</td>
<td>22</td>
<td>22</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>3</td>
<td>32</td>
<td>22</td>
<td>24</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>5</td>
<td>29</td>
<td>28</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>7</td>
<td>28</td>
<td>23</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>9</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>21</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>11</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>21</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>13</td>
<td>30</td>
<td>16</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>15</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>15</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>17</td>
<td>15</td>
<td>10</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>19</td>
<td>16</td>
<td>11</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>21</td>
<td>15</td>
<td>9</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>23</td>
<td>15</td>
<td>10</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>25</td>
<td>14</td>
<td>9</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>27</td>
<td>14</td>
<td>10</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>29</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>9</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>31</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>10</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>33</td>
<td>17</td>
<td>10</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>35</td>
<td>15</td>
<td>11</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>37</td>
<td>16</td>
<td>11</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>39</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>16</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>41</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>15</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>43</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>16</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>45</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>21</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>47</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>21</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>49</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>21</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>51</td>
<td>24</td>
<td>22</td>
<td> </td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

## Figure-18: Number of alerts received and responded wk 1 to wk 3, 2013

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
        <th>Week</th>
        <th>Measles</th>
        <th>Leishmaniasis</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
        <td>Wk-1</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>1</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Wk-2</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Wk-3</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>1</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

This weekly Epidemiological Bulletin is published jointly by the National Institute of Health, Islamabad and World Health Organization (WHO), Pakistan. For Correspondence: NIH: eic.nih@gmail.com; WHO: Tel : +92-051-9255184-5, Fax : +92-051-9255083; E-mail: wr@pak.emro.who.int.
05


---


Weekly Bulletin: DEWS, Pakistan, Week no. 3 (13 to 19 Jan 2013)

Table-1: Number of alerts and outbreaks reported and investigated with appropriate response

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th colspan="7">Weekly Bulletin: DEWS, Pakistan, Week no. 3 (13 to 19 Jan 2013)</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td colspan="7">Table‐1: Number of alerts and outbreaks reported and investigated with appropriate response</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td></td>
      <td colspan="2">2012</td>
      <td colspan="2">Current week 2013 (week ‐ 3)</td>
      <td colspan="2">2013 (Total up till week ‐ 3)</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Disease</td>
<td>A</td>
<td>O</td>
<td>A</td>
<td>O</td>
<td>A</td>
<td>O</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Acute watery diarrhoea</td>
<td>635</td>
<td>171</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>1</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Acute jaundice syndrome</td>
<td>113</td>
<td>22</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Bloody diarrhoea</td>
<td>146</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>CCHF</td>
<td>68</td>
<td>41</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Dengue fever</td>
<td>175</td>
<td>29</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Diphtheria</td>
<td>60</td>
<td>16</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>1</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Measles</td>
<td>5873</td>
<td>790</td>
<td>134</td>
<td>22</td>
<td>470</td>
<td>86</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Pertussis</td>
<td>366</td>
<td>147</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>1</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>NNT + tetanus</td>
<td>560</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Malaria</td>
<td>136</td>
<td>68</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>2</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Leishmaniasis</td>
<td>899</td>
<td>78</td>
<td>18</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>61</td>
<td>8</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Others</td>
<td>1528</td>
<td>58</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>29</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
      <td>Total</td>
<td>10559</td>
<td>1431</td>
<td>168</td>
<td>28</td>
<td>584</td>
<td>99</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

## Distribution of Wild Polio Virus cases Pakistan 2011 and 2012

* As of 19 January 2013, Pakistan has reported no new cases from any district. In year 2012, a total of 58 polio cases including 55 <u>type-1</u>; 2 <u>type-3</u>; and 1 <u>mixture type-1 and 3</u> cases from 28 districts/tribal agencies .

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
        <th rowspan="2">Province</th>
        <th colspan="3">2012</th>
        <th colspan="3">2013</th>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <th>P1</th>
        <th>P3</th>
        <th>P1+P3</th>
        <th>P1</th>
        <th>P3</th>
        <th>P1+P3</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
        <td>Punjab</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Sindh</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Khyber Pakhtunkhwa</td>
<td>27</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>FATA</td>
<td>17</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Balochistan</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>AJ&amp;K</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Gilgit-Baltistan</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Islamabad</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Total</td>
<td>55</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

Map of Pakistan showing distribution of Wild Polio cases in 2012 with callouts for specific districts: Diamer (06/08/2012), Mohmand (10/11/2012), Lakki Marwat (30/11/2012), Sherani (02/10/2012), Rajanpur (21/05/2012), and N Feroz (09/09/2012). Legend indicates NSL1=55, NSL3=2, and NSL1+NSL3=1.

## Follow up of CCHF

### CCHF:

CCHF is a serious viral hemorrhagic fever with up to 50% case fatality rate, caused by an RNA virus of family Bunyaviridae, genus Nairovirus, carried by Hyalomma species of ticks. Human beings become infected by tick bites or crushing the ticks, which are usually found on sheep, cattle, goats or camels, and their slaughtered skins. They may also be exposed to the virus in blood or tissues of a viremic animal during its slaughter and butchering; or by contact with infected blood or secretions of acute human cases in home or hospital setting.

In week 3, 2013, no new suspected CCHF cases were reported from Balochistan. In 2012, a total of 61 suspected cases have been reported throughout the country with 42 confirmed to date and 17 deaths; (CFR is 40.48%). 24 confirmed cases have been reported from Balochistan; 7 from Sindh; 6 from Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and 5 from Punjab. Chart at right illustrates current situation of CCHF cases in 2012.

Number of CCHF cases (week 1 - 52, 2012 to week 3-2013), Pakistan

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
        <th>Epi-week</th>
        <th>Suspected</th>
        <th>Positive</th>
        <th>Deaths</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
        <td>1-12</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>13</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>14</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>15</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>16</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>17</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>18</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>19</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>20</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>21</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>1</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>22</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>23</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>24</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>1</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>25</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>26</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>1</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>27</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>1</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>28</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>1</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>29</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>30</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>31</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>2</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>32</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>33</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>34</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>35</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>1</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>36</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>37</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>38</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>1</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>39</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>40</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>2</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>41</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>42</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>43</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>44</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>45</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>46</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>47</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>48</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>49</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>50</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>51</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>52</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>2</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>3</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>1-13</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

Approximately all the cases had contact history with animal trading/handling, tick bite, contact with patient, tannery worker, butcher/animals slaughtering, a traditional practice of wearing fresh animal skin (posti) to treatment ailment. These animals and their skins had continuous movement Intra Pakistan and between neighboring countries (Afghanistan and Iran).

Any contact of a CCHF patient should monitor his/her temperature for 14 days and see a doctor if fever develops. The anti viral medicine Ribavirin has been effective in saving lives of patients who report early to the health facility.

This weekly Epidemiological Bulletin is published jointly by the National Institute of Health, Islamabad and World Health Organization (WHO), Pakistan.
For Correspondence: NIH: eic.nih@gmail.com; WHO: Tel : +92-051-9255184-5, Fax : +92-051-9255083; E-mail: wr@pak.emro.who.int.

06

---


Weekly Bulletin: DEWS, Pakistan, Week no. 3 (13 to 19 Jan 2013)

# Focus on: Measles

Measles is a highly contagious viral disease, which affects mostly children. It is transmitted via droplets from the nose, mouth or throat of infected persons. Initial symptoms, which usually appear 10–12 days after infection, include high fever, runny nose, bloodshot eyes, and tiny white spots on the inside of the mouth. Several days later, a rash develops, starting on the face and upper neck and gradually spreading downwards. There is no specific treatment for measles and most people recover within 2–3 weeks. However, particularly in malnourished children and people with reduced immunity, measles can cause serious complications, including blindness, encephalitis, severe diarrhoea, ear infection and pneumonia.

Measles is a killer childhood disease but preventable through immunization. One in 15 people have complications with measles, and one in 1,000 will die of it, but two doses of measles vaccine will protect people against the disease. WHO has set the target for measles elimination for 2015 which would require that more than 95% of the world children are covered by two doses of measles vaccine.

## Proper case management during outbreaks:

It is imperative that during outbreak situations proper case management is ensured in order to minimize measles related deaths and measles related complications. The treatment of measles patients with Vitamin A will dramatically reduces their risk of deaths. Two doses of Vitamin A will be given to all identified cases (active and old) during house-to-house investigation, unless it was already received as part of the treatment in the health facility. One dose to be given by the health worker on the day of investigation and the 2nd dose provide to the parents advising to give on next day. The therapy will be given regardless of previous vitamin A prophylaxis. If the investigation team observes complications, the patient should be referred to the nearest health facility for specific treatment of these complications.

## Measles Prevention:

Routine measles vaccination for children; combined with mass immunization campaigns in countries with high case and death rates, is key public health strategy to reduce global measles mortality rates. The measles vaccine has been in use for over 40 years. It is safe, effective and inexpensive. It costs less than one US dollar to immunize a child against measles. Measles vaccine is provided by the Pakistan EPI programme to children at 9 months and 15 months. Children who are vaccinated against measles before 9 months of age must receive a 2nd measles vaccination at 9 months age ensuring a gap of one month between both vaccinations. Moreover, any child who received measles vaccine should also receive OPV.

Priority should be placed to immunize children 6 months to 5 years old during outbreaks, regardless of vaccination status or history of disease. Auto destructible syringes and safety boxes are recommended and safe disposal of used sharps and safety of injection during immunization should be ensured. Let’s remind all our neighbors, friends and colleagues to be sure that their children are immunized against measles.

Table at the bottom summarizes the situation of measles in year 2012; and illustrates the alerts and outbreaks in 2013 up till week 3 (19 Jan 2013).

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
        <th rowspan="2">Province</th>
        <th colspan="4">2012 (Week 1 - 52)</th>
        <th colspan="4">2013 (Up till week 3)</th>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <th># of Alerts</th>
        <th># of Outbreaks</th>
        <th># of Cases</th>
        <th># of Deaths</th>
        <th># of Alerts</th>
        <th># of Outbreaks</th>
        <th># of Cases</th>
        <th># of Deaths</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
        <td>AJ&amp;K</td>
<td>163</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>265</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>18</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>52</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Balochistan</td>
<td>446</td>
<td>118</td>
<td>1810</td>
<td>30</td>
<td>131</td>
<td>24</td>
<td>462</td>
<td>31</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>FATA</td>
<td>211</td>
<td>31</td>
<td>559</td>
<td>13</td>
<td>19</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>71</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Gilgit Baltistan</td>
<td>37</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>50</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>16</td>
<td>0</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>ICT</td>
<td>27</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>63</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>1</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Khyber Pakhtunkhwa</td>
<td>1988</td>
<td>108</td>
<td>3539</td>
<td>38</td>
<td>83</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>232</td>
<td>3</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Punjab</td>
<td>807</td>
<td>38</td>
<td>1318</td>
<td>16</td>
<td>105</td>
<td>26</td>
<td>302</td>
<td>5</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Sindh</td>
<td>2177</td>
<td>484</td>
<td>7219</td>
<td>213</td>
<td>114</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>1239</td>
<td>63</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Total</td>
<td>5856</td>
<td>788</td>
<td>14823</td>
<td>310</td>
<td>480</td>
<td>89</td>
<td>2395</td>
<td>103</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

This weekly Epidemiological Bulletin is published jointly by the National Institute of Health, Islamabad and World Health Organization (WHO), Pakistan.
For Correspondence: NIH: eic.nih@gmail.com; WHO: Tel : +92-051-9255184-5, Fax : +92-051-9255083; E-mail: wr@pak.emro.who.int.
07


---



Weekly Bulletin: DEWS, Pakistan, Week no. 3 (13 to 19 Jan 2013)

## Alerts and outbreaks, week 3, 2013

Geographical map of Pakistan showing Disease Early Warning System (DEWS) alerts and outbreaks by district for week 03, 2013. The map includes pie charts on various districts indicating the number and type of alerts. A legend in the bottom right explains the symbols: The number in the center of the chart pie is the total number of the alerts for the district. Colors represent Diphtheria, H1N1, Leishmaniasis, Malaria, Measles, NNT, Pertussis, and Typhoid. The map also shows national, province, and district boundaries.

This weekly Epidemiological Bulletin is published jointly by the National Institute of Health, Islamabad and World Health Organization (WHO), Pakistan. For Correspondence: NIH: eic.nih@gmail.com; WHO: Tel : +92-051-9255184-5, Fax : +92-051-9255083; E-mail: wr@pak.emro.who.int.

08
